---
layout: post
title: "Work + Grad School: A Data Scientist's Survival Guide (Part 2)"
date: 2018-10-09
---
This post originally appeared on [Medium](https://medium.com/@panderson555/work-grad-school-a-data-scientists-survival-guide-part-2-1efa7d79ca20)

## Foreward
_So, you’ve decided you’re doing it._
You’re going to continue with your full-time job while pursuing some sort of graduate degree. Seems easy enough — you’ve watched a video lecture here and there, read a few topical books, maybe even done a whole Coursera course — all while you worked. Why not take it up a notch and get a full degree while you’re at it? Besides, with the recent proliferation of (reputable) online education opportunities, you don’t even need to be anywhere near the school you’re attending to get a degree. Working a full-time job and attending a high-caliber graduate school is now a legitimate option that, as recently as 10 years ago, simply didn’t exist.
These were my thoughts at age 23. I was working as a data analyst in Cincinnati and realized that if I wanted to be in the profession long-term, I was going to need a quantitative masters degree. As straightforward as that sounds, the problem was that that degree wasn’t going to do the same things for me that a medical or law degree would. Put another way, I wasn’t in a situation where a single piece of paper would allow me to do a job that was radically different from one I was already doing; to be sure, the analytics field values graduate education, but it values it in conjunction with experience, not as a standalone entity. So, if I eventually wanted to manage, or break into data science, acquiring a graduate degree was a river I would have to cross.
In addition to this, there isn’t really a “best” data science degree. The top contenders — computer science, statistics, and operations research — are obvious, but no one of these paints the whole picture. The same way that a deep knowledge of data structures isn’t going to help you specify a regression model, knowing that a given estimator is unbiased isn’t going to help you figure out efficient I/O for a 400GB table. To succeed in data science, you need to build skills in all of these areas, to varying extents, simultaneously. You also need to learn how they interact and find application in a real-world business setting — knowing things in a vacuum is not going to justify your salary. After some thought, I concluded that the optimal path for me was simply to work and go to school at the same time, which I like to think of as a sort of modern-day apprenticeship program.
In late 2014 I decided to go for it and applied to Texas A&M’s Masters of Statistics program, which not only appeared to be very well-regarded, but also had the option of 100% online completion. I would be able to continue my work of designing and evaluating real-world advertising campaigns, while earning the degree that I had decided I needed. Easy, right? Wrong. While it has brought me a great many benefits, earning this degree has easily been the most challenging endeavor I have ever undertaken. Four years (!) later, however, I am in my final semester, and consider myself to be a work + school veteran. Reflecting on that journey, I realized that there were a multitude of things I wish I had known prior to starting, if for no other reason than that I would have had a better idea of what I was getting myself into. This guide is the brief manual that I wish that I had had access to 4 years ago — if you are considering the pursuit of a graduate degree while working, or are already doing so, this is for you, and I hope you find it useful.

